docs: rough draft of onboarding guide (#70)
adbc-drivers/docs.adbc-drivers.org: building-drivers/index.md

---
# Copyright (c) 2026 ADBC Drivers Contributors
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#         http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
{}
---

# Building Drivers

> While ADBC is an open standard, few external contributors have successfully built and released ADBC drivers outside the Apache ecosystem. The purpose of the Foundry is to change that. The Foundry provides all of the resources that were previously missing for database vendors and users to easily build their own drivers.

Reviewer: I don't like this framing in the initial sentence. It sounds vaguely negative and possibly not really true.

Reviewer 2: I took a stab at rewording this.

## Repository Modes

Your code can live in a repo in the [adbc-drivers](https://github.com/adbc-drivers) organization or under your GitHub organization.

**Internal**: If you choose to develop under [adbc-drivers](https://github.com/adbc-drivers), Foundry staff can grant your team members enough permission to operate entirely independently, including managing secrets and environments for access to external cloud resources.

**External:** If you prefer to develop your driver under your own organization, Foundry staff can create a build-only repository for your driver under adbc-drivers.

## Process

At a high level, here's what the process looks like to from zero to a fully released and dbc-installable driver.

1. File an issue at [adbc-drivers/onboarding](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/onboarding). Fill in the template describing the driver you want to build or contribute.
2. Foundry staff creates a repo under adbc-drivers.org for your driver.
3. Foundry staff adds templates with common workflows, CI, and validation.
4. They invite members of your team and give you appropriate access.
5. You develop the driver as you see fit.

> 6. When you tag a release, Foundry staff can help coordinate making it available with [dbc](https://columnar.tech/dbc).

Reviewer: I think it would be better to describe the build and distribution process generically and cite dbc as an example of one important distribution channel.

## Resources

The Foundry offers a variety of tools to help develop and maintain drivers.

### SDKs

> The Foundry is focused on building drivers that can be loaded by an ADBC Driver Manager. Under this mode, drivers can be written in any language that can export a C ABI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Foundry is focused on building drivers as shared libraries that can be loaded by any ADBC Driver Manager. Under this mode, drivers can be written in any language that can export a C ABI.
```

> In practice, most drivers are written in C/C++, Go, or Rust. And because Go and Rust are such common choices, the Foundry provides frameworks for both languages that include helpers for common concerns such as error handling and managing result sets, testing, and more. Both of these projects use a "HEAD-only" model where formal releases are not made: just depend on the latest commit. (Also, we currently do not publish to package managers like crates.io, though that may change in the future.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, most drivers are written in C/C++, Go, or Rust. And because Go and Rust are such common choices, the Foundry provides frameworks for both languages that include helpers for common concerns such as error handling and managing result sets, testing, and more. Both of these projects use a "HEAD-only" model where formal releases are not made: just depend on the latest commit. (Also, we currently do not publish these helper frameworks to package managers like crates.io, though that may change in the future.)
```

```

Based on the configuration file in `.github/workflows/generate.toml`, it will generate CI workflows (see below) and a pixi config. We provide a [JSON schema for the configuration file](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/dev/blob/main/schema/generate-schema.json), and the tool will generate a minimal config if it is run from a repository without a config file. See below for more information about how to use the tool.

#### pre-commit

The Foundry maintains [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) hooks to validate license headers (see below), which we suggest you use. Also, we encourage the use of pre-commit for things like formatting code.

### Testing

We encourage you to test your driver thoroughly. In particular, we encourage you to use the validation suite (described next), but unit tests and other integration tests you develop yourself may also be added.

### Validation & Conformance Testing

The Foundry provides a validation suite at [adbc-drivers/validation](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/validation) that tests common driver functionality and generates user documentation based on the results. These tests are independent of the driver's implementation.

> Specifically, the validation suite is a [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) test suite designed to be overridden and customized for your particular driver. It loads the driver shared library, tests different driver features like the metadata catalog, and runs a series of queries and bulk ingest operations. The test suite records the results and asserts that the expected Arrow data types, result data, etc. are received. This tests both feature completeness and correctness. The results are used to generate documentation showing users supported features and how the driver maps column types to Arrow data types and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Specifically, the validation suite is a [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) test suite designed to be overridden and customized for your particular driver. It loads the driver shared library, tests different driver features like the metadata catalog, and runs a series of queries and bulk ingest operations. The test suite records the results and asserts that the expected Arrow data types, result data, etc. are received. This tests both feature completeness and correctness. The results are used to generate documentation showing users supported features and how the driver maps your database's column types to Arrow data types and vice versa.
```

The basic config will look like this:

```toml
driver = "mysql"

[lang.go]
```

This expects the driver to be located in the `go/` subdirectory. You can configure it to expect the driver at the root instead:

```toml
driver = "mysql"

[lang.go]
subdir = "."
```

See the [JSON schema for the configuration
file](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/dev/blob/main/schema/generate-schema.json) for more details about what can be customized.

If your driver is located in another repo or you wish to use C/C++, you will need custom code. You can see an example of this in the [Quack driver](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/quack), which defines `ci/scripts/build.sh` and `ci/scripts/test.sh` to wire up the C++ build system to the CI workflows.

If you include a `compose.yaml`, you can run tests/validation against a container. There are also various other hooks like `pre-test.sh` and `pre-build.sh` to do any other customization that may be needed.

### Licensing

> Generally, drivers are open-source under a permissive license. We suggest (and use) [Apache 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0), not least because many of us come from a background as maintainers/committers/PMC members for Apache Software Foundation projects, but licenses like MIT or BSD are also reasonable. Please ensure that your driver does not depend on proprietary or copyleft components (i.e. that the driver actually fulfills the requirements of a permissive license).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, drivers are open source under a permissive license. We suggest (and use) [Apache 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0), not least because many of us come from a background as maintainers of or contributors to Apache Software Foundation projects, but other permissive open source licenses like MIT or BSD are also reasonable. Please ensure that your driver does not depend on proprietary or copyleft components (i.e. that the driver actually fulfills the requirements of a permissive license).
```

  ```yaml
  - repo: https://github.com/adbc-drivers/dev
    rev: <insert latest revision>
    hooks:
    - id: rat
  ```

  The pre-commit hook can be configured with `.rat-excludes` and `.rat-apache` files at the root. The former lists (glob) patterns of files to ignore; the latter maintains an allowlist of files that are expected and allowed to have the "This file has been modified from its original version…" text.

### Distribution & Packaging

If you use {ref}`standard CI workflows <building-drivers-internal-tooling>`, then pushing a tag will trigger a build-test-release that ends with a new release on GitHub containing packages that we can then upload to the CDN. Otherwise, you will need to generate appropriate packages yourself; you can see the [packaging script](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/dev/blob/main/adbc_drivers_dev/package.py) as a reference for the format. You will also need to generate a `manifest.toml` and ideally a documentation page (again, all of this is handled by the standard CI workflows).

Once you have a GitHub release with the expected formats, let Foundry staff know so we can check the release and upload it to the dbc CDN.

### Repository Standards

> We ask that all open-source repositories follow these standards:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We ask that all open source repositories follow these standards:
```

## FAQ

### Why not under apache/arrow-adbc?

> TODO: Talk about this

Reviewer: You can reuse the explanation of this from https://adbc-drivers.org/2025/10/29/announcing-adbc-driver-foundry.html

---
# Copyright (c) 2026 ADBC Drivers Contributors
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#         http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
{}
---

# Building Drivers

As ADBC has grown, the focus has shifted to building out drivers for all manner of different systems. For the first couple years of the project's history, most drivers were centrally developed by Apache Arrow contributors, with one or two drivers developed indepndently in scattered places. The ADBC Driver Foundry ("the Foundry") aims to scale up driver development by providing an open source hub for federated driver development, along with resources to support database vendors and users in development.

> The federated nature of the Foundry lets each driver have its own repository, with its own maintainers and privileges. At the same time, it provides centralized frameworks and consistent processes to ensure a common level of functionality and polish, and gives users a single place to discover, download, and submit feedback on drivers. This offers developers more flexibility than the centralized development model of the core Apache repository, while still ensuring a consistent user experience unlike the "Wild West" of ODBC and JDBC drivers all developed in their own scattered repositories to differing standards.

Reviewer: I did another pass on these opening two paragraphs, and added a third:

```suggestion
In ADBC's first years, only a handful of drivers existed. Most were built by a small group of core developers within the Apache Arrow project, and a few by independent community members. Then ADBC went mainstream, and demand for new drivers exploded. At the same time, the vendors behind the databases, query engines, and data platforms that ADBC connects to wanted an active role in the direction and maintenance of their own drivers. The centralized Apache Software Foundation governance model was ill-suited to both: it funneled every contribution through the small group of core maintainers who could review and merge it, and it gave vendors no real ownership of the drivers that carried their names.

The ADBC Driver Foundry ("the Foundry") was created to fix this. Each driver lives in its own repository, with its own maintainers and commit privileges. Those who own a driver can steer its direction and ship changes without waiting on a central gatekeeper. But the Foundry stops short of the opposite extreme—fully independent projects, each reinventing the basics and drifting toward its own conventions. Instead, it pairs that autonomy with shared scaffolding. Common frameworks and consistent processes hold every driver to the same baseline of functionality and polish. Centrally run services handle the work each driver would otherwise duplicate—validating drivers; building binaries; code-signing, notarizing, and distributing them; and documentation. For driver developers, this means time spent on the driver itself, not on the machinery of shipping it. For users, it means one trustworthy place to find drivers, and a consistent experience across them—rather than the fragmented, uneven landscape typical of earlier driver ecosystems.

This model has proven successful. The Foundry is now home to more than a dozen drivers from a diverse group of vendors, and it has emerged as the preferred source of drivers for numerous downstream systems that rely on ADBC for database connectivity. And there's much further to go: the infrastructure behind the Foundry is built to handle hundreds more drivers as the ecosystem continues to grow.
```

## Repository Modes

Your code can live in a repo in the [adbc-drivers](https://github.com/adbc-drivers) organization or under your GitHub organization.

**Internal**: If you choose to develop under [adbc-drivers](https://github.com/adbc-drivers), a Foundry administrator can grant your team members enough permission to operate entirely independently, including managing secrets and environments for access to external cloud resources.

**External:** If you prefer to develop your driver under your own organization, a Foundry administrator can create a build-only repository for your driver under adbc-drivers.

## Process

At a high level, here's what the process looks like to from zero to a fully released and dbc-installable driver.

1. File an issue at [adbc-drivers/onboarding](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/onboarding). Fill in the template describing the driver you want to build or contribute.

> 2. A Foundry administrator creates a repo under adbc-drivers.org for your driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. A Foundry administrator creates a repo for your driver in the adbc-drivers organization.
```

---
# Copyright (c) 2026 ADBC Drivers Contributors
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#         http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
{}
---

# Building Drivers

> While ADBC is an open standard, few external contributors have successfully built and released ADBC drivers outside the Apache ecosystem. The purpose of the foundry is to change that. The foundry provides all of the resources that were previously missing for database vendors and users to easily build their own drivers.

Reviewer 2: We're inconsistent about capitalizing Foundry; we should decide. Time to start a style guide too?

The Foundry provides:

> - A home for your drivers in our adbc-drivers org

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A home for your drivers in our [adbc-drivers GitHub organization](https://github.com/adbc-drivers/)
```

Author: For these kinds of comments, I'll fix them all up in a larger pass. I originally didn't link things to save time when drafting.

- Well-tested and feature complete SDKs for building drivers in a variety of languages
- Ready to run CI workflows for building, testing, and releasing drivers
- An advanced validation suite to help you test and document your drivers capabilities

> If you're interested in building a driver, continue reading to understand the process of building a driver with the Foundry. If you have any questions, we encourage you to join the Columnar Community Slack.

Reviewer 2: (links here too?)

## Process

> At a high level, here's what the process looks like to from zero to a fully released and dbc-installable drivers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At a high level, here's what the process looks like to from zero to a fully released and dbc-installable driver.
```
